

## Biological and Social Order

"Enduring structures" like living things and society are self-perpetuating orders that are in continuous cycles of wealth production and consumption. Production involves the transformation or relocation of matter to create wealth, and consumption transforms/relocates wealth/matter in a way that sustains or expands living things/orders and their internal parts/orders. The Sun sends us photons/energy which the process of photosynthesis is able to store in chemical form. This energy is then used to power the cycles of production/consumption. If there is more production than consumption then the order is profitable and thus has additional wealth with which to sustain itself for longer periods and/or grow. For example, paramecium are single-celled life-forms that produce food/wealth by swimming around and swallowing small bacteria which they then consume by digesting and transforming them into the various nutrients/wealth needed to maintain and expand the paramecium's internal order and thus life. A more complex multi-cellular animal like a person, is simply a collection of cells (which are themselves orders) which must be productive as a whole in order to produce and then consume the necessary wealth needed to nourish itself and the sub-orders/organs/cells/organelles it is composed of. Today we not only have biological order, we have social order, Spencer's "Social Organism", which is rapidly growing and increasing its 'rate of production', in other words, the rate at which it transforms the earth's matter into human usable wealth/order/life/biomass. Every year, increasingly automated building-sized machinery in the mining industries scrape/mine less than 10 cubic miles of matter from the earth's massive volume of 260 billion cubic miles. This matter is 'collaboratively transformed' or relocated by billions of people as trillions of dollars worth of wealth in terms of cars/computers/buildings/products/etc. are produced thus increasing the word's economic pie of wealth and social order. These continuous cycles of production and consumption require precise knowledge/information. By focusing on how information arises, spreads, and guides these cycles of production and consumption which lead to order/life/society we can have a simple yet profound understanding of how the entire world works.
