
### Creation and Spread of Information via Economic Competition

In the 'Social Organism' new/superior information arises and spreads largely thanks to economic competition. Economic competition motivates the social order's billions of minds/CPUs to constantly innovate and copy each other's innovations thus continuously generating and spreading superior information, inadvertently reordering society as fast as humanly possible/profitable, turning it into a sort of super-computer which coordinates the transformation of matter into socioeconomic order/life. For example, all private sector orders/companies like BMW, Ford, and Toyota are constantly innovating and copying each other's innovations like power door-locks/windows and more recently electric vehicles thus continuously creating/spreading superior information and subsequent order. Why do they do this? Because people/orders have the freedom to trade their life/order-sustaining wealth with the better informed auto-manufacturers/competitors. This in turn motivates all competitors/orders to learn/copy each other lest they not get enough revenue/wealth with which to pay their employees a competitive wage so they leave to join the better informed and thus more productive/efficient orders. This wonderful automatic mechanism is "turned on" or "emerges" from the simple concept, or better said, tradition of 'private property'. Private property gives everyone in our role as consumers the 'freedom to trade' our life/order-sustaining wealth for what we calculate/think is best. This 'freedom to trade/choose' in turn motivates everyone, in our role as producers, to discover how to order ourselves in a manner that produces something society/customers value (our labor, a product/service), which we do by, once again, innovating and/or copying/learning existing ideas/information, in other words, by competing in the economic sense. Most of us simply choose to produce and then trade our labor with a company/order that knows how to further incorporate our labor in a more competitive/profitable way.

A mind/CPU anywhere in the planet that comes up with an improvement will benefit everyone in the world if they are free to trade for his product/service which will also motivate all competitors in the world to likewise improve their actions/order. So we can see how just like in the Olympics we can discover the best athletes in the world due to global competition, so does having the freedom to trade with everyone in the world allows the best ideas to compete/spread globally thus ensuring the best possible global order. As cost-cutting ideas emerge and inevitably spread via competition leading prices to continuously fall, new profitable ideas easily arise and once again spread via competition in an endless cycle of knowledge generation/innovation. For example, computers were once very expensive, but once the price of making them came down enough, people easily realized that every home could have them, which gave birth to our computerized world and the Internet and all the great things that flow from it. The more wealth is produced, the more wealth has to be offered in exchange for labor as companies/orders compete against each other for the labor they need which helps explain why the economic pie grows for everyone. For example, imagine that after a shipwreck you end up in an island where everyone has a machine that can turn dirt into food. Tom wants your labor to build a home, Mark, to build a boat, and Gina to plant a garden. Competition will motivate them to offer you all the food you want and more.  
