
Having discussed several aspects of the market process like economic competition and interest rates, as well as how 'private property' inadvertently leads to its emergence and civilization, we can now discuss how 'processes of selective evolution' evolved the 'market process'/'Social Organism' without conscious human planning or design. As Carl Menger asks:

>"How can it be that institutions that serve the common welfare and are extremely significant for its development come into being without a common will directed towards establishing [them?"](https://cdn.mises.org/Investigations%20into%20the%20Method%20of%20the%20Social%20Sciences_5.pdf) 

Hayek answered this monumentally important question more or less as follows. If we envision mankind about 50,000 years ago, we would see a sort of petri-dish of competing cultures(languages/concepts/rules/laws) that are being 'naturally selected' based on their ability to grow the groups that contain them relative to other groups. Customs/concepts/rules/etc. that inadvertently cause their respective social orders to grow whether it'd be via conquest, successful defense, migration into, imitation, etc., will expand their order AND the very customs/concepts/rules/ideologies/etc. which helped them thrive. Every rule/law has an effect in the productivity/growth/survival of a social order. Given that a society/tribe is likely to have dozens of such rules it is impossible to know the exact impact of any one of them when considering the overall competitiveness of a society/order. For simplicity's sake let us focus on just one rule, what is the optimal punishment for theft? Let's assume that in culture/tribe 'A' when a man steals he is killed which might deter many thefts but decreases the number of people in the group and all the productivity that this person might contribute in the future. In tribe 'B' they cut off a hand, and in tribe 'C' 10 lashes. Let's assume that tribe A's custom/rule of killing the thief actually proved to lead to a "fitter" social order. Perhaps it turns out that cutting off the hand led to an unproductive person that became a big drain on rest of tribe and a weak/useless fighter when it came to offense/defense so it was better if he was dead, and that lashes proved to not be enough of a deterrent which led to many thefts and retaliatory violence which turned out to be more costly than losing a member of the tribe. For simplicity's sake let us assume that this was by far the most important custom/rule affecting the growth/fitness of the social order, and that because of this, tribe/culture 'A' eventually displaced the others so that its kill-thieves rule/custom survived while the other punishments disappeared. The kill-thieves rule, is the result of human action, yet not the result of conscious human planning or design with the reasoned or conscious goal of having a more competitive/fit social order. The real designing of this rule or cultural element was made, not by innate instinct or human reason, but by 'natural selection'/competition/'group selection'/'cultural evolution'.

This concept of 'cultural evolution'/'group selection' allowed Hayek to identify a sort of 'third dimension'/source/mechanism for discovering/spreading knowledge which was neither instinctual (tied to our genetics/biology), nor the result of our conscious reason. As Hayek liked to refer to it, it was a mechanism for creating/spreading information which laid "between instinct and reason" and is the largely unknown/understood source of knowledge that played the vital role in the evolution of the market process and those related social institutions. Omnipresence, the ability to be everywhere at all times is another concept that would provide a great benefit to religions that used it to describe their God. Without God's omnipresence you could get away with breaking the rules that give society order and only have to face the consequences brought upon by fellow men. But if God is everywhere, watching your every move, you will be much more likely to follow those rules that give your society a productive social order. A similar case can be made for the concepts of "sin" and "evil". Did clever men "conspire" to create our religions to control us? Of course not, like the 'market process' they too "are indeed the result of human action, but not the execution of any human design". These concepts/rules help enforce constraints on what for brevity's sake we'll refer to as our evolved tribalistic('small group')/primate-like nature/instincts, which for millions of years were shaped by things like cannibalism, rape, what today would be considered pedophilia, tribal warfare and other practices which are now generally seen as abhorrent and whose relatively recent suppression via culture/religion/law enabled the emergence of the 'Social Organism'/civilization. Growing up is about programming/molding our flexible brains into learning all of these rules and thus rewiring them to be as happy as possible even though many of these restrictions go counter to our 'uncivilized instincts'. We have tentacle porn, Q.E.D. Obviously the molding/brainwashing fails quite often when we engage in rape/torture/militarism/war/"sin" and more. One can easily speculate about how the simplicity and pro-private-property character of Judaism's Ten Commandments ('Thou shalt not steal/murder/'commit adultery'/ 'covet(neighbor's…)) and monotheism helped it be more 'viral' and thus be 'naturally selected' over other beliefs/religions that might have been more complex/confusing/contradictory and also be less respectful of private property thus inadvertently foregoing the emergence of the market process and corresponding 'Social Organism'/Civilization. Just like natural selection modified solitary cells to have tumor suppressing genes to control rapid cell division/proliferation (cancer) in order to cooperate in a multi-cellular organism, so has cultural evolution likewise molded homo sapiens to suppress these "uncivilized" tendencies. As Hayek tells us:

>"Man has been civilized very much against his wishes. It was the price he had to pay for being able to raise a larger number of children. We especially dislike the economic disciplines… The indispensable rules of the free society require from us much that is unpleasant, such as suffering competition from others, seeing others being richer than ourselves, etc., etc." (Hayek "Law, Legislation and Liberty, Volume 3: The Political Order of a Free People" 1981, p. 168)

>"Constraints on the practices of the small group, it must be emphasized and repeated, are hated. For as we shall see, the individual following them, even though he depend on them for life, does not and usually cannot understand how they function or how they benefit him."…"Disliking these constraints so much, we hardly can be said to have selected them; rather, these constraints selected us: they enabled us to survive." (Hayek "The Fatal Conceit", 1989, p. 14)
