
### Early Cultural Evolution : Names, Self, Identity, Language and Reason

When/how did we begin "naming" people which would bring a tremendous advantage for group cooperation. Associating ideas/language with the concept of the "self"? And linking the "self" with group/religious/tribal identities which was vital for group/tribal cohesion in war/conquest/defense? The farther back in time we go, the more ethnocentric/tribalistic our ideologies/identities were. A tribe/group that didn't have such strong us vs. them mentality would be outcompeted in war/offence/defense and be naturally selected out of existence thus what remained/existed in our tribal past was strong ethnocentrism. These vital early cultural concepts/software are neither "in our genes", and also "do not prove to be the result of an intention aimed at this purpose, i.e., the result of an agreement of members of society" [(Menger)](https://books.google.com/books?id=3NdnezJePIQC&pg=PA130&lpg=PA130&dq=result+of+an+intention+aimed+at+this+purpose,+i.e.,+the+result+of+an+agreement+of+members+of+society&source=bl&ots=UC_E8u_fPu&sig=ACfU3U13Jzkf_em3RgupNaY7li841zhG9w&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjnzteF5_7mAhXiNX0KHXFKBVwQ6AEwAHoECAUQAQ#v=onepage&q=result%20of%20an%20intention%20aimed%20at%20this%20purpose%2C%20i.e.%2C%20the%20result%20of%20an%20agreement%20of%20members%20of%20society&f=false), they were designed/refined by competition between groups. Most slightly smarter apes still place great emphasis on their "identity" as Jews, Christians, Muslims, etc., sometimes leading to understandable yet disastroust results as will be discussed later. Obviously it only takes a few seconds to come to the realization that whatever "identity"/religion one identifies with is purely based on luck/circumstance and having grown up among fellow slightly smarter apes that raise us identifying as such. 

What about human "reason"? It too has far more to do with cultural evolution than most realize. Imagine the following cruel scenario. A baby is taken from his mother at birth and raised by plain-looking mechanical arms. No human being looks at him in the eyes implying that there is a "self" behind them. He never sees his own reflection, is never spoken to and thus never picks up a language which is crucial for thinking. For example, Mises writes:

>"Thought is bound up with speech. The thinker's conceptual edifice is built on the elements of language. The human mind works only in language; it is by the Word that it first breaks through from the obscurity of uncertainty and the vagueness of instinct to such clarity as it can ever hope to attain. Thinking and that which is thought cannot be detached from the language to which they owe their origin." [(Mises, "Socialism")](https://www.econlib.org/book-chapters/chapter-part-iiich-19/)

How would this unfortunate person "think" as an adult regardless of how powerful the brain and what it gets purely from genetics? Hayek writes:

>"It may well be asked whether an individual who did not have the opportunity to tap such cultural tradition could be said even to have a mind" (Hayek, "The Fatal Conceit")

My guess is that a bonobo/ape, raised among humans and taught some rudimentary sign language would act far, far more reasonably than this "culture/software-less" person. And again, what is the process that designs those things like language, religions and 'the market process' which "are indeed the result of human action, but not the execution of any human design"(Ferguson)? Natural Selection/competition via Hayek's 'group selection'.

Knowing that 'private property' is the simple concept/institution that leads to a chain-reaction of incentives which creates the Social Organism, we can easily see that those tribes/orders whose customs/religions inadvertently became more peaceful and thus less violent, extended peace/friendship/trade to those outside the tribe, etc., in other words, those who tended to respect 'private property' and thus individual freedom more and more, would become more advanced/powerful, and as they grew, they would inadvertently spread the very customs (increasing respect for private property, tolerance, and commercial culture that emerges from it) and evolving economic system (market process/capitalism) that allowed them to reach such relative heights. Once again, the true sort of 'designer' of the market process was our old friend 'natural selection'/competition acting on groups/cultures, inadvertently selecting those customs/ideologies/concepts as if they were genes. We are now in a position to understand Hayek when he writes:

>"The ultimate decision about what is accepted as right and wrong will be made not by individual human wisdom but by the disappearance of the groups that have adhered to the "wrong" beliefs."

>"Culture is neither natural nor artificial, neither genetically transmitted nor rationally designed. It is a tradition of learnt rules of conduct which have never been 'invented' and whose functions the acting individuals usually do not understand" (Hayek "Law, Legislation and Liberty, Volume 3: The Political Order of a Free People" 1981, p. 155)

>"To understand our civilisation, one must appreciate that the extended order resulted not from human design or intention but spontaneously: it arose from unintentionally conforming to certain traditional and largely moral practices, many of which men tend to dislike, whose significance they usually fail to understand, whose validity they cannot prove, and which have nonetheless fairly rapidly spread by means of an evolutionary selection - the comparative increase of population and wealth - of those groups that happened to follow them. The unwitting, reluctant, even painful adoption of these practices kept these groups together, increased their access to valuable information of all sorts, and enabled them to be 'fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it' (Genesis 1:28). This process is perhaps the least appreciated facet of human evolution." (Hayek, "The Fatal Conceit" p. 6)
