### Dealing with pollution

Taking care of the environment is one of the easiest problems to solve. The key to protecting the environment is to privatize as much as possible. All of it, including rivers and oceans. If someone dumps garbage in your house they are violating law #2 (Do not encroach on other persons or their property ). If all land is privatized all garbage and pollutants would have to be properly disposed of or stored or transformed into something people don’t mind having around. It is that simple. There is no such thing as pollution or environmental problems in privately owned land. If rivers and streams were privately owned the dumping of toxic chemicals in rivers and streams would be a violation of the river owner’s property rights and bring about a justified lawsuit. Garbage disposal and storage companies would buy large tracts of cheap and undesirable land and use it to properly store and dispose of our garbage and pollutants and they would always take the necessary precautions so that such garbage and pollutants cannot make it to other people’s property. If the pollutants happen to be dangerous chemicals that can get in water supplies and pollute surrounding private property then they would have to be stored in containers raising the cost associated with disposing of such pollutants. This increase in the price associated with disposing of certain pollutants is a signal that carries with it information, the fact that properly disposing of this chemical is hard to do and requires a lot of care and resources. The companies which use these chemicals will then base their calculations as to whether to use the chemical or not based on this price which embodies all the details relevant to its proper disposal and this would discourage the very use of such pollutants. If the use of such pollutants was a crucial part of some process then it would be included in the final price of whatever process the pollutant is used in and be able to pay for its proper disposal, if not, then the pollutant would not be used. For example, Larry owns a plastic making company and as a byproduct of his plastic making process a very toxic pollutant is created which requires an expensive chemical process that breaks it down into things that aren’t harmful. If Larry’s plastic is great stuff that people are willing to pay a lot of money for, enough money to also cover the cost of the process of transforming the pollutant byproduct into a non-pollutant, then great, Larry is in business, his productive structure is self-sustaining and socially desirable, if not, then Larry needs to find something else to do or wait until a better way of dealing with his pollutant comes along. This example once again shows us how prices contain knowledge.

An important thing to realize about the proper disposal of pollutants is that their disposal is nothing but a transportation and/or transformation of matter, and that this is something that market-process coordinated human ant-farms are getting better at faster and faster and faster. Every increase in the efficiency of transportation or automation improves our ability to move/store/dispose of garbage/pollutants. And as our ability to transform matter improves, sometimes we can learn to use our old garbage for new things like in the cases of profitable recycling. This is why the cleanest and most environmentally sound places in the world also happen to be the most economically advanced. Increasingly productive human ant-farms find it easier and easier to clean up after themselves. All garbage is  just matter that has been transformed from a state that is useful to us to one that is less useful or uneconomically usable at a certain time. But as time passes by and our ability to transform matter to our benefit increases garbage will eventually become a usable natural resource.