### The conservation of species

Many people increasingly see human beings as a cancer that is growing and destroying the planet and selfishly and “unfairly” killing off other species. But this is not true, and the root of this mistake is due to our belief that we are somehow apart from nature and also to extending our egalitarian tendencies to all living things, and of course, the usual culprit, our lack of an understanding of how the market process creates the social order. It is important to keep in mind how flexible our minds are, we can brainwash ourselves to love and care greatly about fellow human beings but also things like our cars, favorite shirts, teddy bears, pets and especially for some biologists and nature lovers, all living things like bugs, grasses and so on, some of which unfortunately go extinct due to our flourishing. We are a new lifeform, not just a new kind of big-brained ape, we are parts of the new social organism. And species growing and changing the environment at the expense of others is fair game as far as natural selection is concerned. Actually, everything is fair game for natural selection. Our transition from social animal in our tribal world to market process coordinated social organism is as significant in the evolution of life and the continuous increase in complexity on this planet as the transition from single-celled to multicellular life which occurred about a billion years ago. Many people love the way beavers transform their environment when they build dams in rivers, yet they find our cities, skyscrapers, soaring planes, chemicals, and world of concrete and pavement to be an environmental disaster and are completely unaware that these transformations of the world around us are precisely what create a better environment for human beings. One free of snakes, rotting and decaying animals and the countless microbes which would be praying on us.

It can be easy to relate to people who love insects and grasses almost as much as human beings. Natural selection has created every creature to be so unique, with such a wonderful evolutionary story to tell. I love biology! One can even feel like other species besides human beings are sort of innocent because whatever seemingly “evil” things they need to do to survive are not done out of apparent malice like it might seem amongst us humans. Our wars and nuclear weapons can do so much damage; we could easily destroy the whole world and its amazing complexity which has taken natural selection billions of years to create. But even if this were the case, the evolutionary story of life has had many drastic extinctions and setbacks in the past, and perhaps a billion or two years in the future there will be big-brained roaches who reach our present level of civilization, it would just be an unfortunate change that I don’t want to happen either. But preventing the continued economic progress of mankind is not the way to go about helping other species. Other species need us. We are the species that will take the life/order/complexity we have evolved here to other places like the nearby planets and who knows what the future might hold. It is just a matter of time before some asteroid or other major natural disaster takes us out and quite possibly all life in this planet. Assuming there are other planets with life out there, they too will all need a human-being-like species that will also become a social organism and be able to overcome inevitable cosmic disasters. Not only is it great that we are alive right now, but we are part of that special cosmological event where life consciously wakes up and is able to protect itself from cosmological disasters and continue to expand its order. We need to realize that when we work and trade and therefore integrate ourselves with the social organism we are becoming something wonderful, much more unique than the species that will die off and weren’t able to achieve our order. Amongst the many good things we will be doing for all life is that thanks to rapid increases in biotechnology, within a relatively short time we will be able to sequence the genomes of any species we stumble upon with ease, helping save each specie’s amazing evolutionary journey should they be displaced by our progress. Obviously the environments where such creatures have evolved is in many ways as important as their genomes but I think they’d still appreciate our effort. Perhaps someday in the future we could recreate the habitats of species that are dying now and bring them back to life. We are the saviors of all life in this planet, not the destroyers. We are natural selection’s latest and greatest creation. As Spencer said:

>“Instead of civilization being artificial, it is a part of nature; all of a piece with the development of the embryo or the unfolding of a flower. The modifications mankind has undergone, and are still undergoing, result from a law underlying the whole organic creation.”

We really shouldn’t get all worked up over species dying. Every time a species dies you are giving a helping hand to whatever that species ate. Many times all that happens is that the balance of life/order changes, that’s all. Besides, if we slow down the progress of mankind we will be denying the right of the many species that have adapted to leeching off of us to continue their evolution. By preventing the further expansion of human beings we are also preventing the further evolution of things like roaches and the various diseases that pray on us. What about their rights and intrinsic value?

Many people would also love to own some of these dying species but our governments make owning such animals illegal. If people were allowed to own the various monkeys, tigers, and so on that are going extinct it would never happen. Sure a tiger can run away from time to time and kill a loved one, but people would take the necessary precautions. The market process would discover the best way to make all of these things happen.