
## Introduction: Without Mises and Hayek mankind drifts towards extinction

!INCLUDE "IntroPar.md"

Standing on Mises' shoulders, who provided him with a superb explanation of the workings of the economy and thus all aspects of the market process(money/prices/interest rates/etc.) and much, much, much more, Hayek would go on to explain how in a few thousand years culture and 'the market process' had co-evolved to transform homo sapiens, from tribes of slightly smarter apes, into today's massively complex global socioeconomic order/'Social Organism' thus arguably becoming the first person in the history of mankind to provide a complete evolutionary understanding of how the world works. About 100 years earlier, Spencer, who Darwin once referred to as "twenty times my superior", and in a correspondence to Spencer mentioned that "Every one with eyes to see and ears to hear (the number, I fear, are not many) ought to bow their knee to you, and I for one do", and whose book "Social Statics" the great economist/historian/intellectual Murray N. Rothbard referred to as “the greatest single work of libertarian political philosophy ever written”... had also provided a profound and nearly complete evolutionary explanation of the world:

>"We have to deal with man as a product of evolution, with society as a product of evolution, and with moral phenomena as products of evolution."

Others before Spencer had tried, but as Spencer points out:

>"Lacking the great generalizations of biology, it was…impossible to trace out the real relations of social organizations to organizations of another order."

Simply put, without the microscope and numerous biology-related breakthroughs that were occurring in the 1800s which Spencer was able to incorporate into his thinking, it was just "impossible" for prior synthesizers to do a good job. Spencer was at the right time and place and ran with it leaving behind even today's leading intellectuals. His profound understanding of the world made him one of the most eloquent voices against the growing threat of Socialism/Communism, of which his 1884 essay "The Coming Slavery", which economics literary giant Henry Hazlitt praised as "One of the most powerful and influential arguments for limited government, laissez faire and individualism ever written", is but one example. Fully seeing the growth in monopolistic/tribalistic/socialistic nationalism and the inevitable socioeconomic decline and large-scale-nationalist conflicts it would lead to, Spencer died a depressed man in late 1903. Just ten years later in 1914 his worst fears came true via WWI, Lenin's Communist revolution in Russia and all the Government/Socialist/Communist created misery that followed. As truly astounding as Spencer's insights were, many of his insights were clever and eloquent analogies, and not necessarily precise explanations. The writings of Carl Menger (who was influenced by Spencer), and later Ludwig von Mises (another Spencer fan), would provide key insights which could be pieced together to create a truly complete evolutionary explanation of the world which eventually coalesced in Hayek's mind. Hayek is still is so far ahead of our time that even today's leading thinkers, like renowned popular science writer Matt Ridley, are just catching up to the enormity of his insights. Ridley humbly acknowledges this in a 2011 speech where he mentions:

>"As someone who came to Fredrick von Hayek comparatively late in life, I'm still catching up with him...Indeed, many of the insights I thought I had discovered in my own readings and writings on the frontier of evolutionary biology and economics it turns out Hayek had long before me...It's Hayek who first puts it all together." - [Matt Ridley](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pG-grkJPU8Q)

So how did Hayek 'put it all together'?. Easy. Hayek realized that "all enduring structures above the level of the simplest atoms, and up to the brain and society" require precise information to sustain/coordinate/expand their order. If one understands how information coordinates the biological and social orders, then one understands how the world works. It is that simple! Let's briefly try to get a feel for how Hayek saw the world. 

What follows below can be roughly divided into two parts, the first discusses how the socioeconomic order works, and the second how it has co-evolved with culture/religion/ideology. As we do so we try to focus on how economic ignorance is the root of mankind's most pressing problems like the current Coronavirus scare and antisemitsm/(Jew-Gentile relations) which continue to play such a disastrous role in the Middle East and propagates fallacious "good" vs. "evil" thinking. This essay is written with a 'Misesian Ethos'. Ludwig von Mises believed that "Economics deals with society’s fundamental problems; it concerns everyone and belongs to all. It is the main and proper study of every [citizen”](https://mises.org/library/human-action-0/html/pp/932) and is thus written with the hope/expectation that it can be understood by the curious/motivated layperson.