
## Introduction: Without Mises and Hayek mankind drifts towards extinction

!INCLUDE "IntroPar.md"

Standing on Mises' shoulders, who provided him with a superb explanation of the workings of the economy and thus all aspects of the market process(money/prices/interest rates/etc.) and much, much, much more, Hayek would go on to explain how in a few thousand years culture and 'the market process' had co-evolved to transform homo sapiens, from tribes of slightly smarter apes, into today's massively complex global socioeconomic order/'Social Organism' thus arguably becoming the first person in the history of mankind to provide a complete evolutionary understanding of how the world works.  The writings of Carl Menger (who was influenced by Spencer), and later Ludwig von Mises (another Spencer fan), would provide key insights which could be pieced together to create a truly complete evolutionary explanation of the world which eventually coalesced in Hayek's mind. Hayek is still is so far ahead of our time that even today's leading thinkers, like renowned popular science writer Matt Ridley, are just catching up to the enormity of his insights. Ridley humbly acknowledges this in a 2011 speech where he mentions:

>"As someone who came to Fredrick von Hayek comparatively late in life, I'm still catching up with him...Indeed, many of the insights I thought I had discovered in my own readings and writings on the frontier of evolutionary biology and economics it turns out Hayek had long before me...It's Hayek who first puts it all together." - [Matt Ridley](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pG-grkJPU8Q)

So how did Hayek 'put it all together'?. Easy. Hayek realized that "all enduring structures above the level of the simplest atoms, and up to the brain and society" require precise information to sustain/coordinate/expand their order. If one understands how information coordinates the biological and social orders, then one understands how the world works. It is that simple! Let's briefly try to get a feel for how Hayek saw the world. 

What follows below can be roughly divided into two parts, the first discusses how the socioeconomicorder works, and the second how it has co-evolved with culture/religion/ideology. As we do so we try to focus on how economic ignorance is the root of mankind's most pressing problems including antisemitsm/(Jew-Gentile relations) which continue to play such a disastrous role in the Middle East and propagates fallacious "good" vs. "evil" thinking. This essay is written with a 'Misesian Ethos'. Ludwig von Mises believed that "Economics deals with society’s fundamental problems; it concerns everyone and belongs to all. It is the main and proper study of every [citizen”](https://mises.org/library/human-action-0/html/pp/932) and is thus written with the hope/expectation that it can be understood by the curious/motivated layperson.