

#### You can't print savings/wealth. The Errors of Keynes, Krugman and the mainstream.

It should be easy to see that you can’t “print savings” at least not the REAL wealth/savings that the REAL world needs, yet to John Maynard Keynes, arguably the most famous mainstream economist, such money-only savings “are just as genuine as any other savings” (p. 83) Let’s look at another absurd statement from Keynes which further reflects the utter ignorance of the vital role savings play in the economy:

>“…whenever you save five shillings, you put a man out of work for a day. Your saving that five shillings adds to unemployment to the extent of one man for one day — and so in proportion. On the other hand, whenever you buy goods you increase employment…For if you buy goods, someone will have to make them. And if you do not buy goods, the shops will not clear their stocks, they will not give repeat orders, and some one will be thrown out of work. Therefore, oh patriotic housewives, sally out to-morrow early into the streets and go to the wonderful sales which are everywhere advertised. You will do yourselves good…And have the added joy that you are increasing employment, adding to the wealth of the country because you are setting on foot useful activities…Surely all this is the most obvious common sense. For take the extreme case. Suppose we were to stop spending our incomes altogether, and were to save the lot. Why, every one would be out of work. And before long we should have no incomes to spend.” (Keynes, 1963, pp. 152–3)

Wow! First of all, when most people save their money they invest it, which for the general case here we’ll just assume that it is loaned out at interest. The money still gets spent by the borrowers as Hazlitt already reminded us. With respect to his “extreme case” where people save all their income and don’t spend. Why bring up such a foolish scenario that would never be in anyone’s best interest to attempt? Who does not want to trade/spend for the food, gasoline, wealth they need to survive?

Keynes, like most of his adherents (and the public at large sadly), is also utterly ignorant of the vital fact that ‘economic activity’ must be coordinated in a way that produces more than it consumes, otherwise it is obviously shrinking the economic pie. Yet this coordination requires precise knowledge and is something only millions of free individuals and businessmen can achieve by using profit/loss calculation at the individual, household, and corporate level. Unaware of this, Keynes disastrously encourages the purposeful destruction of wealth just so people are put to work rebuilding it even though the effects of this are a massive shrinking of the economic pie. He writes:

>“…activity of one kind or another is the only possible means of making the wheels of economic progress and of the production of wealth go round again.…why not pull down the whole of South London from Westminster to Greenwich, and make a good job of it…Would that employ men? Why, of course it would!” (Keynes, 1963, pp. 153–4)

One should not be fooled by fancy money-related terms or mathematical equations. Complex-looking mathematical equations/models are just as inappropriate for making sense of the socioeconomic order as they are for making sense of how trillions of cells, bacteria and viruses coordinate the biological one. If you just keep your eye on the cycle of wealth production and consumption, most economic fallacies can easily be avoided. The housing that comprises the ‘South of London’ exists, it is then destroyed thus a huge loss in wealth has occurred, then a massive amount of existing wealth has to be consumed in terms of food/energy/materials/etc. to sustain many men who produce new buildings. The net result is the loss of existing housing and the wealth needed in exchange for new buildings. Had the housing not been destroyed, Londoners would’ve still had them plus new housing or whatever else the men would have produced as they consumed the same amount of existing wealth as before.

So the erroneous belief that real savings/wealth can be “printed” to then “stimulate the economy” (i.e. ‘activity of one kind or another’ even if you have 0 regard for whether the people are ordered in a way that produces more than it consumes), provide the one-two punch of fallacies that keep the mainstream making the same errors over and over, culminating in the most horrific economic fallacy that could possibly exist, that war is good for the economy and its corollary, that WWII is what got the USA out of the Great Depression of the 1930s. Consider the following absurdity by 2008 Nobel Laureate in Economics Paul Krugman:

>"Think about WWII…it brought us out[of the great depression]. If we discovered that, you know, space aliens were planning to attack and we needed a massive buildup to counter the space alien threat…this slump would be over in 18 months"

How can getting millions of people to consume/wear-down existing wealth to produce weapons which are then used to destroy fellow human beings and their property be anything other than an obvious reduction in life/wealth/order? Krugman's statement is the perfect example of what Mises once told students: 

>"Don't be afraid to speak up. Remember, whatever you say about the subject and however wrong it might be, the same thing has already been said by some eminent economist."
