
#### Economic ignorance is the root cause of the relative underperformance of "minorities"/blacks

The overwhelming factor in the relative underachievement of "minorities" compared to "whites", especially African Americans, is simply due to the fact that blacks find themselves (due to obvious historical factors like slavery) in an environment where the economic fallacies which lead to central planning/Socialism (take from others to redistribute equally/fairly via huge monopolistic gov. bureaucracies) are even more convincing/viral. Again, if white people/everyone hates the rich and wants to see redistribution of wealth as the solution to every problem, it makes perfect sense that such sentiment would be much stronger with blacks. For example, perhaps America's most famous black leader, Martin Luther King, like most other prominent black political leaders and intellectuals, had little understanding of economics, and for reasons already hinted at, his socioeconomic views leaned more towards Socialism. One of today’s leading mainstream African American intellectuals, Michael Eric Dyson writes:

>“King also contended, in 1967, that “the roots [of economic injustice] are in the system rather than in men or faulty operations.” In a remarkable statement in a speech he gave to his staff in 1966, King laid out the ideological basis for his deepened assault on poverty, economic injustice, and class inequality:

>>We are now making demands that will cost the nation something. You can’t talk about solving the economic problem of the Negro without talking about billions of dollars. You can’t talk about ending slums without first saying profit must be taken out of slums. You’re really tampering and getting on dangerous ground because you are messing with folk then. You are messing with the captains of industry….Now this means that we are treading in difficult waters, because it really means that we are saying that something is wrong… with capitalism….There must be a better distribution of wealth and maybe America must move toward a Democratic Socialism

>This statement is remarkable since King rarely allowed his positive response to democratic socialism to be recorded. His usual practice, according to one of his aides, was to demand that they “turn off the tape recorder” while he expounded on the virtues of “what he called democratic socialism, and he said, ‘I can’t say this publicly, and if you say I said it I’m not gonna admit to it.’ ” King “didn’t believe that capitalism as it was constructed could meet the needs of poor people” ” [(Dyson,"I may not Get There with You: The True Martin Luther King, Jr" p. 88)](https://books.google.com/books?id=F7ljj_iyQcwC&pg=PA87&lpg=PA87&dq=%22King+also+contended,+in+1967,+that+%E2%80%9Cthe+roots+%5Bof+economic+injustice%5D+are+in+the+system+rather+than+in+men%22&source=bl&ots=aiAd2iTj9v&sig=ACfU3U2wI2T3iw9aW7v1OF8Qx75vPbFZsA&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjG6s78xvjmAhWVnp4KHbATCZYQ6AEwAHoECAEQAQ#v=onepage&q=%22King%20also%20contended%2C%20in%201967%2C%20that%20%E2%80%9Cthe%20roots%20%5Bof%20economic%20injustice%5D%20are%20in%20the%20system%20rather%20than%20in%20men%22&f=false)

So understandably MLK had to keep his Socialist socioeconomic views under wraps but it was hard to conceal the fact that he was often surrounded by communists. Another famous American black leader, Malcolm X, sent a letter to President Truman letting him know that [“I have always been a communist”](https://books.google.com/books?id=RownbjVryWIC&pg=PT124&lpg=PT124&dq=%22I+have+always+been+a+communist%22+malcolm+x&source=bl&ots=0zculHF59I&sig=ACfU3U08S-Up8-ZXAnVbSZs0_Df5Bu7CdA&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwiAopS3x_jmAhVTop4KHbaxAzgQ6AEwAnoECAgQAQ#v=onepage&q=%22I%20have%20always%20been%20a%20communist%22%20malcolm%20x&f=false). Perhaps the most famous international black leader, South Africa’s Nelson Mandela who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1993 is also a Socialist ideologue. In a statement at the beginning of the trial that would send him to jail for 27 years he said:

>“We all accept the need for some form of socialism to enable our people to catch up with the advanced countries of this world and to overcome their legacy of extreme poverty...I should tie myself to no particular system of society other than of [socialism.” ](https://books.google.com/books?id=beRL3schM0kC&pg=RA2-PA206&lpg=RA2-PA206&dq=%22We+all+accept+the+need+for+some+form+of+socialism+to+enable+our+people+to+catch+up+with+the+advanced%22&source=bl&ots=67XG2f71DK&sig=ACfU3U3ViPIrY7wN-Wp-h_ky-qKPzAlYtA&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjA8tHXx_jmAhVGJTQIHdefAfQQ6AEwAnoECAgQAQ#v=onepage&q=%22We%20all%20accept%20the%20need%20for%20some%20form%20of%20socialism%20to%20enable%20our%20people%20to%20catch%20up%20with%20the%20advanced%22&f=false)

These black leaders/intellectuals should not be blamed for the fact that they have inadvertantly pushed America in the wrong socioeconomic direction and have helped keep Africa devastatingly poor at times. We want to understand the complex environmental factors that lead to the economic fallacies which then manifest themselves in the more obvious/trivial "identities" of socialists/communists/etc., and place the "blame" on such fallacies, instead of blaming the current "identities" of people which can easily change with the proper understanding of economics. Further proof of the damage that such leaders and their bad economic policies creates can be seen in those cities where blacks have the most political power and can thus implement their well-intentioned yet socioeconomically disastrous programs and regulations. As black economist Walter E. Williams writes:

>“While black politicians have preached that political power is a means to gain economic power, whether it has done so is a testable proposition. We only have to examine the socioeconomic status of black Americans in cities where blacks hold considerable political power, cities such as Washington, D.C., Newark, Philadelphia, Detroit, Cleveland, Memphis and others. What we'll find in those cities are grossly inferior education, welfare dependency for much of the population, unsafe neighborhoods and citizens, both black and white, who can't wait for the first opportunity to [get out.”](http://walterewilliams.com/does-political-power-mean-economic-power/)

