
### Money III

Creating money does not just restructure the social order to the benefit of the ones increasing the money supply like it did for Alan, it has another bad and subtler effects. Let’s assume there is another island (GreenIsle) one mile east of Alan's BlueIsle and another island (DarkIsle) to the east of GreenIsle so on a map they look something like this:

BlueIsle --- mile --- GreenIsle --- mile --- DarkIsle

As the prices rose in BlueIsle because of Alan’s increasing/inflation of the money supply and the fact that there are less goods being produced, BlueIslers started going to GreenIsle to buy stuff where prices were now relatively cheaper than in BlueIsle. As people from BlueIsle started buying goods from GreenIsle, GreenIsle got a large increase in money and saw its goods being shipped westwards to BlueIsle, so GreenIsle saw an increase in the money supply and a reduction in the amount of goods thus more dollars chasing a smaller amount of goods so prices eventually rose there as well. People in GreenIsle saw that prices in BlueIsle were already very high so they took their new money to Darkisle to take advantage of the lower prices there. New money came to DarkIsle as goods went westward to GreenIsle and BlueIsle and prices rose in DarkIsle. Unfortunately for the people in DarkIsle their new money could not get them much from GreenIsle and much less BlueIsle where prices were already high. DarkIsle was the biggest loser, they saw their real wealth, the real goods they produced leave their town and all they got was paper which could not buy them as much from Green as what they gave up in exchange for the paper; all thanks to Alan manipulating the money supply to his advantage. 
In the previous example we can see that as the new money spreads throughout the economy, those who are closest to where the new money entered the economy get a benefit and those that are furthest away are harmed the most, there has been a redistribution of wealth as the gradual increase in prices worked its way through the entire economy. Alan was the biggest winner. Instead of first producing economic-pie-increasing wealth and then trading it for money and using the money to reduce the economic pie via his consumption, he simply created the money without previous pie-increasing-production, leading to pure consumption of the economic pie, or pure theft from society. The next benefactors were his employees, then his town as a whole as they bought things from town B. Many in town B suffered higher prices and not being able to buy from the already-expensive town A but at least they got to use some of the additional money to buy from town C whose members really got cheated.


Next let's assume there is an island (GreenIsle) to the left of BlueIsle where prices have not gone up so people from Alan's island now go there for shopping. From high above one can see money goes into GreenIsle while wealth leaves it leading to more money per existing wealth and eventually higher prices there as well. The people in GreenIsle are inadvertently trading, not wealth for wealth, but wealth for paper/money and in a way being robbed just like the average BlueIsler was misled into trading their labor/wealth for Alan's paper. We can see how the people who create the money first are the biggest benefactors of money-creation, they get to trade the money for REAL wealth. The people who get the money second get to trade the new money for wealth before prices go up

Also assume that Tom in GreenIsle stops creating chairs for people and now builds and mostly exports ladders to BlueIsle which are used to make Alan's castle. 

Bottom line, whether it is with malicious intent, ignorance or a combination of both, those who create money (governments via their central banks) can reorder society in disastrous ways.
