

### Money II

Let's go over another insightful scenario. Keep your eye on how much wealth is being produced and consumed, and the relationship between the quantity of money, wealth, and thus prices. Let's say Alan prints himself another $100,000 which is enough to hire half the people in BlueIsle for 3 months while they build him a small castle. Alan thinks this is a great idea, he is paying some people more than what they were making before, there were also a few unemployed or unmotivated-to-work people before but he is offering enough money to get everyone working thus achieving "full-employment". Prior to trading their labor for Alan's paper/money, people were producing stuff that they either wanted/needed to consume themselves or could be sold/traded to others who obviously wanted/needed to consume them, they were producing "socially desired" or "order/life creating/sustaining" stuff like oranges/apples/hair-cuts/blankets/baskets/etc. The day half the population begins working on Alan's castle, the island's economic pie begins to lose half its "socially desired" stuff/wealth since half the population is no longer creating it, and begins increasing the amount of rocks, ladders, and other things for Alan's castle. These things, are NOT "socially desired" or "order creating/sustaining" wealth as judged/calculated by the inhabitants. Since the existing $100,000 will be distributed over half as many socially-desired-goods, this would eventually motivate their prices to about double. However, since Alan is further doubling the money supply as he pays people using his newly printed $100,000, on the last days of castle-building, when half the population is still working on his castle and they have also received most of the new $100,000, prices would have nearly doubled once again making them about 4 times higher than they were before Alan came up with his idea. It should be easy to see that Alan has reordered society in an inferior way. Everyone is "working" and making more money than before, but the unavoidable reality that they are ordered in a less productive way reflects itself in the much higher prices and smaller amount of wealth on average that each can consume. Ideally people now "lose their jobs", and instead of working on the easily identifiable yet disastrous plan laid out by Alan, for a few days there appears to be "chaos" as people discover superior plans and likely transition to their old trades/jobs thus once again reordering society on a far, far more productive way. However, they are **economically ignorant**, so they tell Alan "Can you hire us again to make the castle bigger? You pay us more than what we used to make before. You are about to create massive unemployment". Alan thinks to himself "Gosh! It is a good thing that by creating money I am preventing massive unemployment and chaos. Obviously I must keep providing 'liquidity'!" So the relative suffering continues. Had Alan been a bad king, who instead of creating money to acquire the necessary wealth to create his castle, simply taxed people at a 50% rate, the people's living standard would have suffered similarly, but they would have easily understood the fact that their wealth was taken from them for the creation of things they didn't want or benefit from for a hopefully more obvious massive loss.
