Consider how hardly anyone in the world has the slightest clue regarding the fact that rising prices are due to government/central bank money creation. How it is that over and over and over and over again, something so simple and vital goes unnoticed leading to so much economic chaos. As Carl Menger showed us, the use of gold for money, was also "not...to be the result of an intention aimed at this purpose, i.e., the result of an agreement of members of society or of positive legislation." It too, like language, and other social institutions was the "unintended results of historical development.” It was the Social Organism's way to not only provide a money that could be used for economic calculation, but prevented central planning by malicious or clueless cells like Alan was able to do to create his castle to the great detriment of the social order. Gold can't be printed obviously. In the old days, rulers/kings would sometimes run out of gold with which to pay their troops and the wars would end, but this would not be the case as central banking began to emerge, giving ideologues a new way with which to sustain and prolong to even more severe levels the socioeconomic hardship that war and central planning brings. As Prof. Salerno mentions in one of his many great lectures at the Ludwig von Mises Institute:

>“Wars have invariably been financed by printing money since the invention of paper money. Indeed, it might be said that paper fiat money and central banks were invented mainly to finance wars. The first irredeemable paper currency in the Western world was issued in 1690 by the British colony of Massachusetts in order to pay its soldiers in its sporadic wars of plunder against the French colony of Quebec. The first central bank in history, the Bank of England, was established in 1694 to finance the mercantilist and imperialist foreign policy of the Whig party that had gained control of the British government.” 

The monopolizing of the banking and financial institutions by governments and their “experts” and regulations has not only helped create all sorts of crises, it has also retarded the further evolution of financial institutions themselves. The following quote by Hayek captures all this beautifully: 

>“…Like morality, law, language, and biological organisms, monetary institutions result from spontaneous order — and are similarly susceptible to variation and selection. Yet monetary institutions turn out to be the least satisfactorily developed of all spontaneously grown formations. Few will, for example, dare to claim that their functioning has improved during the last seventy years or so, since what had been an essentially automatic mechanism based on an international metallic standard was replaced, under the guidance of experts, by deliberate national ‘monetary policies’. Indeed, humankind’s experiences with money have given good reason for distrusting it, but not for reasons commonly supposed. Rather, the selective processes are interfered with here more than anywhere else: selection by evolution is prevented by government monopolies that make competitive experimentation impossible.” (Hayek F. A., 1989, p. 103)

And again, more concisely but far less eloquently:

>“the basic tools of civilisation – language, morals, law and money – are all results of spontaneous growth and not of design, and of the last two organized power has got hold and thoroughly corrupted them”
