
### Money I

We begin by introducing 3 simple concepts which are like a Swiss-army knife of economics.

1. The first and perhaps most important of all: The production of wealth requires the consumption of wealth. For example, if 10,000 men are to spend 2 years producing an airplane factory, they must consume/use the concrete/materials/food/energy/transportation/shelter/wealth that they (as well as their dependents/family) need while they produce the factory.

2. More money does not equal more wealth. Imagine if everyone in the world suddenly had an extra billion dollars. Would this make society wealthier? No. The amount of REAL wealth(goods/services) has not increased by a single toothpick. It would actually lead to less wealth since many people wound stop working/producing seeing their new-found fortune. Would the 10,000 men above be able to produce the factory if instead of having real wealth to use/consume had to consume pieces of paper with dead presidents on them? Of course not.

3. More money leads to and enables higher prices. For example, if there are 1,000 people in an island (BlueIsle) and each has $100 for a total of $100,000 in the island, can anything sell for $200,000? Of course not, even if they all combined their money such a transaction could not happen because there isn't enough money, but what if each person had $500 so that there is now a total of $500,000? Then yes obviously, prices could go up to $500,000. So for general prices to go up there HAS to be more money. And who creates the money and is ultimately responsible for a general increase in prices? Generally speaking, today all money is created by governments via their central banks (Federal Reserve in USA) and they are thus responsible for the price increases. Let’s say you print yourself 1,000 trillion dollars and start offering people in the USA’s West coast ridiculous amounts of money for their goods/property/wealth. You buy all the wealth in California, Washington, Oregon, etc. As this is happening Americans are growing richer in terms of money but poorer in terms of what really matters, homes/property/wealth. At some point you make it to Florida, by this time it will be packed with about 300 million Americans and perhaps the 1,000 trillion dollars or more you kept offering people. The price of wealth tends to be the amount of money that is offered in exchange for it given all the other things the money could be traded for. With so much money and so little wealth left, the price of everything would be astronomical and people would be much poorer given that you are the one that possesses most of the wealth in the country. Assuming the total amount of money remains stable, if the economy/wealth is expanding, which can only happen if the rate at which goods/services/wealth is produced is faster than the rate at which it is consumed, we expect general prices to go DOWN because the money will sort of get divided among more goods/wealth so less money per item/wealth means a lower price. If the amount of wealth remains stable or grows slower than the amount/supply of money, then we have more money per item, thus higher prices.