
## More complexity requires more information

The more complex a thing is, the more information is needed to create it and keep it in order. Tiny E. coli bacteria have about 4,000 genes and are relatively simple in structure and function. On the other hand, each human cell has about 25,000 genes thus containing far more information allowing each cell to specialize and take part in a vast "division of labor" by transforming itself into a heart/lung/nerve/etc. cell as a young fetus develops inside the womb. About 500 million years ago, life-forms with brains began to emerge which allowed information to be stored outside of genes. Eventually life-forms evolved that used their brains to be increasingly "social" and cooperate with others to reach even higher levels of relative productivity/fitness/competitiveness which leads us to ourselves, anatomically-modern man (about 50,000 years ago), whose ancestors had spent over 2 million years living in small nomadic tribes of about 15 to 150 people where everyone more or less knew how to do the same things so information was inefficiently repeated across the social order. Just like few genes/information leads to simple bacteria, few brains lead to a simple and relatively unproductive social order. Tribal man had an information storage/sharing problem. Then something wonderful happened, something as momentous in the history of life as the emergence of biological evolution. The so-called 'market process' and its various components like trade, money, economic competition, and very recently "interest rate coordination" began to emerge, thus giving birth to Spencer's "Social Organism".