

### Prices and the Impossibility of 'Central Planning'/Socialism/Communism

How much wealth had to be consumed in order to produce a gallon of gasoline that sells in Seattle for $3.50? Or a pound of beef that sells in a store in London for $5.35? We can't know for sure, however, we can be fairly certain that it was less than the advertised price which on average must include the costs. The price of any item in the world lets us know that there is an order at that particular place and time that is coordinated by information that can produce the item while consuming less than the advertised price. THAT IS AMAZING! This allow goods to be purchased and combined in a manner that ensures that the combination (like a car) can easily have a price set that properly accounts for the costs/consumption of the whole (car) by just adding the prices of the parts used to produce it (wheels, glass, robotics, labor, etc.), parts which themselves had a price set that included their costs/consumption and so on, each part/input managed/ordered by entrepreneurs with highly specialized time-and-place specific information who are always using profit/loss calculation to ensure they are increasing the economic pie. The concept/tradition of 'private property' plays a vital role here as well, it is not until things are privately owned, that they are controlled/coordinated by brains/CPUs that are incentivized to use/reorder/coordinate them in the most productive/profitable way possible.

The information needed to create/coordinate the social order, like whether to produce cars, or buildings, or pizzas, where to do so, what prices to set, and most importantly, how to produce them in a manner that more wealth is produced than consumed, is information that can only be created by free people dispersed throughout the world thus rendering central planning ideologies like Socialism/Communism IMPOSSIBLE regardless of the good intentions of their members or their intelligence. For example, a Cuban restaurant in Miami Beach sells a picadillo dish (ground beef, plantains, rice) for $8. Perhaps $1 might be profit, and $7 will be spent in costs, in other words, in the necessary consumption of wealth needed to produce the meal/wealth, things like equipment/electricity/food, and everything employees and their families will consume at home (food, energy) thanks to their paychecks that came from the $7/meal. The businessman discovered 1) that there are enough customers nearby willing to patronize the restaurant at the $8/meal price which necessitates taking into account customer's already existing local competitive options thus providing an improvement in society, and 2) how to reorder $7 worth of stuff(labor/supplies/etc.) to produce the meal. If he sets prices too high, customers will choose other superior existing competing options. If he sets prices too low, he won't cover costs and cause more consumption than production thus shrinking the economic pie. These are two vital things that are impossible for a central planning body to discover and helps explain why every time Communism has been attempted the result has been a much faster rate of consumption than production and eventual famine/starvation/chaos/death.

Since prices that properly estimate costs/consumption can only be set by free entrepreneurs, when the government (central planners) attempts to set them via "price controls" it warps the socioeconomic order in inferior ways. For example, if the free-market price of a gallon of milk is $2.30 in a particular store in Miami which profits 0.30 per gallon (costs = $2.00) and the government mandates the price to be $1.99, then the business is consuming more wealth ($2.00) than what it gets ($1.99) and will eventually go bankrupt causing less milk to be produced leading to shortages. Even if the government sets the price to, say $2.15, so that the business can still profit, it will still lead to eventual shortages for the following reasons. Under normal circumstances the rate of profit tends to be equal/uniform across all sectors/businesses, if higher-than-average profits are being made in say auto-manufacturing, factors of production like labor, materials, real-estate are withdrawn from other less profitable sectors which reduces production/competition in them causing profits to go up in those sectors, while simultaneously increasing production/competition in the auto-manufacturing sector causing the initial higher-than-average rate of profit to go down towards average levels. So by making profits in milk production lower than the average it still has the effect of decreasing, albeit less drastically, milk production which is the opposite of what the economically ignorant masses and politicians want.

It is important to envision the socioeconomic order as it really exists as if looked at from high above. Envision people coming together/apart as companies/orders emerge and dissolve in ever-changing conditions. Superior information arising and rippling/restructuring the social order thanks to competition. As orders get more productive they lure other people to 'trade-with'/'join-them' by offering more money/wealth for their labor relative to other companies/orders, eventually causing the least productive orders to sort of dissolve as their 'factors of production' like labor, buildings, etc. are bid away to be parts of more productive plans/orders. A sort of swarm intelligence emerges as the all-pervasive public quickly nourishes the growth and spread or superior orders/companies/information, inadvertently expanding the worldwide "division of labor and information" as entire neighborhoods/cities morph themselves in specialized ways as complementary pieces of information/orders segregate themselves in distinct geographical locations like the software industry in Silicon Valley, California and manufacturing in Guangdong, southern China. As Mises reminds us "The division of labour is a fundamental principle of all forms of life." The division of labor is a pattern/way which natural selection rediscovers to enable smaller units/orders to efficiently compartmentalize labor/information as they contribute-to (and are nourished-by) a larger organism they become parts of(Organelles -> Cells -> Organs -> Humans -> Social Organism).
