

### Patents

By understanding how patents do far more harm than good we can continue to solidify our vital understanding of how information coordinates the social order. One of the reasons why we so naively fall for the erroneous idea that patents are good for society is because we greatly overestimate the importance of the individual or company making the discovery while being unaware of how it is 'the market process', via its various mechanisms like prices, the profit motive and competition, which plays the key role in innovation. Competing orders/companies, due to the fact that they are already in business competing with each other, contain knowledge that has to be relatively similar. If one competitor has knowledge that leads to much more productivity/profitability, it would drive some competitors out of business, and it would also motivate competitors to copy/emulate the superior knowledge thus leading to a state where once again all competitors contain more or less the same knowledge and inevitably come up with new products/improvements/innovations. Which particular mind manages to stumble upon a new innovation has more to do with chance and circumstances than anything else. Patents inevitably turn competitors which are ultimately cooperators since we are constantly learning from each other as we compete, into bitter rivals; give credit to one where many, or better said, the entire social order via the market process and world-wide division of labor are involved; they slow down the market process by preventing further innovation by competitors whose ideas are based on patented ideas because they now have to pay large sums to patent holders; they remove competitive pressure from patent holders thus making them lazier and worth their time and money to go into the damaging business of suing patent infringes thus retarding technological progress; and since the patent system is overseen by a monopolistic and bureaucratic government organization, it is bound to grow more inefficient and chaotic and also prone to manipulation by the better-connected. Patents, just like regulations, simply create/spread paralysis in the market process. The information technology industry, although less regulated than the health care sector provides a good example of how patents begin to paralyze an industry. Prior to 1981 computer programs could not be patented and this helped spark the explosive growth of the computer/software industry. As Microsoft founder Bill Gates tells us:

>"if people had understood how patents would be granted when most of today's ideas were invented, and had taken out patents, the industry would be at a complete standstill today. I feel certain that some large company will patent some obvious thing… If we assume this company has no need of any of our patents then they have a 17-year right to take as much of our profits as they want. The solution to this is patent exchanges with large companies and patenting as much as we can." [(Bill Gate, "Microsoft Challenges and Strategy," memo, May 16, 1991)](http://antitrust.slated.org/www.iowaconsumercase.org/011607/0000/PX00738.pdf )

So Gates clearly saw how patents would lead to paralysis. Unfortunately his solution at the time was not to argue for the abolishment of patents altogether(which I don't blame him for), but to attempt to protect his company by patenting as many things as possible with which to threaten/protect itself from others in this new ecosystem of warring/litigating patent holders. Given the incentives, this is the strategy that works or is "naturally selected", thus we have bigger and bigger patent holders fighting it out in order to progress, while at the same time making it harder and harder for the little guy or new competitor to innovate.

Without patents, the social order is constantly improving and moving the best information which can be copied freely/quickly, but existing patents inadvertently disincentivise this more ideal outcome and cause research/wealth to be diverted for the discovery of non-patented inferior information. For example, a whopping 77% of new drugs approved by the FDA are not "new" in the sense that they make some significant improvement compared to an existing drug; they are what are referred to as "me-too" drugs. These "me-too" drugs are usually inferior to drugs already on the market to treat the same condition, they simply allow competing drug manufacturers to enter the market to treat a condition where other companies might be making huge profits due to their patents/monopolistic position.

Innovating is a lot easier than people think. As previously mentioned, as prices or costs of production go down, that which was prohibitively expensive becomes possible which in turn makes other things possible and so on. The world is vastly more innovative today than it was 100 years ago not because we got any smarter because obviously our biology has not changed, but because the market process has made it easier to innovate. Some innovations revolutionize entire fields and make it easy for further innovations to come about. For example, how much easier was it for scientists to make biology-related innovations once the electron microscope took magnification from about 2,000 times to over two million? How much easier was it to invent all sorts of gadgets once electricity came about, or computers, or the Internet? The market process and continuously evolving world-wide division of labor can be seen as a sort of ever-growing ladder taking humanity up an infinitely high tree whose fruits are innovations. For the most part all we have to do is easily pick them off the branches when the ladder gets us there. Very expensive endeavors that only seem profitable if granted patents can be seen as attempts to grab a fruit/innovation that is currently too high up in the tree and we are better off just waiting for the normal technological progress to get us there by cheapening all related research/etc. instead of damaging the workings of the system/ladder in an attempt to make gains that really leave us worse off due to the damage made to the ladder/system by patents.

The damaging pro-patent ideology is also adding to tensions between patent enforcing nations and developing nations who are being coerced or erroneously persuaded to implement patents while also being sort of accused of "stealing our ideas without proper compensation". This is rooted in the same fallacy of attributing innovation to those making the innovation as opposed to the market process. So-called "developed" areas like North America, Europe, and Japan became developed because the market process managed to work well enough in those areas as to incentivize and coordinate minds in a way that so much knowledge was created, and this was done, in spite of patents, not because of them. Old people, being more likely to be found with cancers, does not mean that having cancers leads to old age, it means that natural selection has built us in a way that we can continue to live for a while in spite of the cancers. Too much government, just like too much cancer, eventually destroys the super-structure. The market process' ability to organize the social order in ways that lead to what we would call progress is amazing. A little freedom goes a long way. Technological progress in the 20th century has been great, in spite of cancerous government bureaucracies, wars, patents and other misguided government regulatory frameworks which we believe to be the creators or managers of social order while they are in fact its retardants or destroyers to significant degrees. Think about how truly unfair the following is: the Chinese had the misfortune of having much of their 20th century destroyed by war and a truly communist economy which led to the deaths of tens of millions while the market process used millions of brains in the US to discover new ideas, and now that the Chinese increase their freedom and begin to have their social order be coordinated by the market process, they have to pay royalties to the West. This seems pretty "unfair" to me. Developing nations like India and China should not feel like they are "stealing" ideas from the more developed nations, and likewise the United States should not be souring economic relations based on patent infringement which you can be sure is a significant part of the economic saber-rattling that the economically clueless/tribalistic Trump administration is doing.

