

### Private Governance

The "political anarchy" Hayek referred to in last quote just means that there was no central authority preventing/monopolizing legal/religious/moral/ethical knowledge and thus preventing the superior knowledge-discovery that cultural evolution/competition brings about. Here we should once again remind ourselves of the unintended harms of government(forced competitionless-monopoly), especially world government organizations such as the United Nations. Their rules/regulations/laws/information are discovered via the usual mixture of human tribalism/nationalism, economic ignorance, all kinds of special interests, the inevitable corruption that emerges and so much more. There is no competition, no voting with your feet once the laws/errors apply to the entire world, as Hayek writes "selection by evolution is prevented by government monopolies that make competitive experimentation impossible". Not only does government stamp out competition which is the main selective/competitive process that helps us discover what is best in terms of how to go about providing goods and services but also what rules/laws, judicial/penal/transportation systems and more are best. Since freedom, decentralization, and the economic/legal/moral competition it creates is the best way to discover superior information and subsequent order, why not allow freedom/competition in things we usually associate with monopolistic governments like the legal and penal systems and more? The cultural evolutionary/competitive process that has shaped religions and more recently secular governments which provide such governmental functions has been happening blindly, and has been largely tied to the religious myths we inevitably see as absolutes, which explains why the legal/penal systems are still draped in religious-like mysticism. Think of priestly judges and their costumes/robes, temple-like court buildings/etc., but once we understand the competitive process we can use it to our advantage. Imagine if people could own large chunks of land and have more sovereignty or freedom as to what laws/rules people should abide by in them. Today the knowledge of how to plan a city, what laws/rules we should follow, what should be the repercussions of breaking such rules/laws, how to design a transportation/legal/penal system and so much more comes about the bureaucratic-monopolized-politicized process that shapes the inefficient public sector. By allowing people the freedom to create such cities we introduce competition in these areas which will discover superior laws/rules/contracts, ways to build transportation systems, ways to deal with people who break the rules and so on. If people wanted to move to such cities they would just sign a contract saying that they would abide by its rules, which is no different than what we do today when we move to a new country/state, which is just agreeing to abide by certain rules. This is similar to choosing product A over product B. In this case people are selecting one set of laws/rules over the other, nourishing a better social order/information while starving an inferior one. They vote for a better system with their feet.
