

### Savings, Interest Rates and the Clueless Mainstream Keynesian Economists

Finance/banking and interest rates are other vital aspects of the 'Market Process'. Besides the more obvious function of safeguarding savings and pooling the savings of many people to allow the execution of bigger projects which would have been impossible if entrepreneurs were limited to the few savings/wealth of friends and family, banking/finance and more specifically the phenomenon of 'interest rates' also play a nearly miraculous role. For example, assuming interest rates are at around 8-10%, some people, those who have no desire to start a business or have inferior business ideas they expect will have a return on investment (ROI) lower than 8%, will be motivated to lend their money to banks to earn ~8% interest and by doing so they refrain from consumption/spending, thus increasing the amount of wealth/savings available to the future borrowers. The banks are a place where such saved money can be combined, easily accessed and loaned out in different quantities to nourish ideas/businesses/restructurings of different sizes. Banks charge borrowers a higher interest than what they pay to savers/lenders and profit the difference. For example, they lend 1 million to John who uses the money to pay for his business' consumption as it produces (has sales revenue) $1,300,000 worth of stuff thus growing the economic pie by 30%. He pays back loan with the 10% interest (1.1 million) and keeps the $200,000. The Bank pays the savers 8% ($80,000) and keeps the %2 ($20,000) with which to pay-for/nourish its own consumption. Something amazing is going on here!!!. Interest rates motivate the accumulation of wealth and movement of money from minds/CPUs that have inferior ideas that can grow the economic pie slowly (0-8% rate) to minds that have superior ideas and can grow the economy faster (> 10%) thus giving a tremendous sort of 'computational boost' to society. To the economically ignorant, banks/financers/money-lenders, making a living by charging interest without seemingly having to "sweat" seems immoral/unethical, but the economically woke can see how they play a vital role in pairing savings with the best ideas and the interest rate is like a barometer that helps decide whether a mind should do the saving or borrowing. It is important to realize that, as the great economist Henry Hazlitt writes in his classic “Economics in One Lesson”:

>“ “Saving,” in short, in the modern world, is only another form of spending. The usual difference is that the money is turned over to someone else to spend on means to increase production”,

and that this increase in production has to be at least large enough to pay back the loan with interest. A society that saves little is sort of stuck in the same cycle of production and consumption and is unable to nourish a new business/idea/restructuring for the time it might take before it produces wealth. Where would our 10,000 airplane factory builders get the wealth to nourish their consumption for the 2 years it would take them to even begin making new planes if others had not saved it? How long would it take for such savings/wealth to exist if savings grow very slowly? On the other hand, a society that saves a lot is constantly making wealth available for superior ideas/businesses/restructurings and thus growing and advancing technologically much faster. 

The more people save, the more money banks will have to lend out and the lower the interest rate will be as banks compete with each other by offering a lower interest rate to lure borrowers. This also means that there is more REAL wealth available to sustain more ideas/businesses, the REAL wealth that savers did NOT consume when they gave their money to banks. If interest rates are at 10%, it does not make sense to borrow/consume to nourish an idea/restructuring that will have a return on investment of less than 10%, but if they go down to 3%, then it does make sense for additional entrepreneurs to borrow and nourish ideas that will yield 10% ROI to profit the 7% difference. Now, VERY IMPORTANT!. What happens if interest rates are lowered, not because more saved/unconsumed wealth is available, but because central banks increased the money supply("bank credit") to "artificially lower" interest rates from the "natural rate" of 10%, to the "artificial rate" of 3%? What happens is that additional projects/ideas which would NOT have been attempted before will now be attempted even though the needed wealth to sustain them to profitable completion will not exist eventually leading to a sort of "bust"/bankruptcies, and partly-finished projects which squandered wealth. Mises has a masterful analogy that goes as follows. At any moment in time given a certain real "natural rate"(again, we assume 10%), there exists enough wealth in terms of bricks/wealth needed to create 100 buildings/projects. If people have really saved more to bring down the interest rate from 10% to 3% there are now more bricks/wealth and 120 buildings/projects can be completed, but if the interest rate has gone down to 3%, not because there really are more bricks/wealth/savings, but because more money has been created, the bases and some scaffolding for 120 buildings is attempted, but eventually, due to the fact that there are now more businessmen with more newly created money which was used to lower the interest rate competing for the same amount of bricks/wealth, the price of bricks (factors of production like labor,land,energy,materials) goes up more than would have otherwise been the case, which eventually causes many entrepreneurs to face the unavoidable fact that there did not exist enough wealth/bricks at the right prices to complete their projects in a profitable way, therefore a sort of bust/chaos and loss of wealth will eventually happen as inevitable bankruptcies occur. Partly finished buildings that are inhabitable are obviously massive losses, and even though eventually perhaps 70 buildings are completed, the wealth/bricks that could have completed an extra 30 was consumed/used to create 50 unfinished ones. Mises summarizes:

>“Credit expansion cannot increase the supply of real goods. It merely brings about a rearrangement. It diverts capital investment away from the course prescribed by the state of economic wealth and market conditions. It causes production to pursue paths which it would not follow unless the economy were to acquire an increase in material goods. As a result, the upswing lacks a solid base. It is not real prosperity. It is illusory prosperity. It did not develop from an increase in economic wealth. Rather, it arose because the credit expansion created the illusion of such an increase. Sooner or later it must become apparent that this economic situation is built on sand.” (Mises L. v., 2006, p. 162)[i]