
### Economic ignorance as the root of antisemitism and its disastrous repercussions

Hayek:

>[to men] the market economy is largely incomprehensible…and its results seem to them irrational and immoral. They often see in it merely an arbitrary structure maintained by some sinister [power."](https://books.google.com/books?id=nJoIhFSgOGwC&pg=PA497&lpg=PA497&dq=%22the+market+economy+is+largely+incomprehensible%22&source=bl&ots=y1_CLw50yU&sig=ACfU3U2YZVA7UBkEWol4Ek96u0rre6QRqg&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjl6oTQhf_mAhWWIDQIHVxgAjoQ6AEwAnoECAoQAQ#v=onepage&q=%22the%20market%20economy%20is%20largely%20incomprehensible%22&f=false)

Who is that 'sinister power'? Each group of slightly smarter apes depending on their history and numerous circumstances mistakenly identifies a different boogeyman. As just briefly mentioned, since the recent and rapid evolution of 'the market process' occurred in Europe, understandably so for much of the third world and non-whites, it is "the white man" and his "exploitative Capitalism" and/or "racism". There is of course, the "evil corporations", "the rich/CEOs", "greed", "sexism", "minorities", etc. It is as if we are fooled into believing that just because the social order is the result of human action, that our problems are likewise the result of conscious planning or design/plotting by fellow slightly smarter apes. They are not. They are overwhelmingly the result of economic ignorance. Next we deal with one group of people where once again economic ignorance leads to their being mistaken as some "sinister power" with disastrous world-wide consequences. The Jews.

Let us begin our discussion by trying to identify key economic fallacies which led to antisemitism and how these and other related fallacies led to Hitler's intellectual errors and much that is related.

The classic and perhaps most important example of the co-evolution of the 'market process' and culture can be seen with the emergence of modern banking/finance. For example, Islam has strong prohibitions against charging interest(usury) which have short-circuited or greatly hampered the market process’ evolution in the Islamic world. The following passages from the Qur’an are perhaps the most relevant:

>“That they took usury, though they were forbidden; and that they devoured men's substance wrongfully;- we have prepared for those among them who reject faith a grievous punishment.” 4:161

>“Those who devour usury will not stand except as stands one whom the Evil One by his touch has driven to madness. That is because they say: “Trade is like usury,” but Allah has permitted trade and forbidden usury...” 2:275

>“Allah will deprive usury of all blessing, but will give increase for deeds of charity: for He does not love ungrateful and wicked creatures.” 2:276

Christianity’s New Testament seems more usury-friendly via passages like, Luke 19:23  “Why, then, didst thou not put money in a bank, so that I on my return might have gotten it with interest?” , but Luke 6:35 “But love your enemies, do good to them, and lend to them without expecting to get anything back” could be used to support an anti-usury position which is what the Church enforced for over a thousand years before eventually abandoning the strong anti-usury stand.

When it comes to Judaism and the Old Testament, God’s message is one that shuns charging interest between Israelites/Jews but allows it to be charged to non-Israelites. The most influential verses are Deuteronomy 23:20 “You may charge a foreigner interest, but not a brother Israelite…” and Exodus 22:25 “If you lend money to one of my people among you who is needy, do not be like a moneylender; charge him no interest.” This is a good example of mankind’s tribal ethnocentrism shunning a practice which is believed to be bad within the group, but allowing its use with those outside the group. The fourteenth-century French Jew Levi ben Gershom felt it was good to burden the gentile with interest ‘because one should not benefit an idolator… and cause him as much damage as possible without deviating from righteousness.’ (Johnson, Paul. (1988). A History of the Jews. , p. 174)

The few religious scriptures we have just read have had profound ramifications. In a Christian world that would excommunicate usurers/moneylenders, Jews being immune to excommunication found an advantage as moneylenders, although an advantage that also came with risky court battles as Christian creditors would sometimes try to play the “charging interest is against God” card when it came to paying their debts. The prevalence of Jews as moneylenders even shows itself in the Magna Carta where there is a small section establishing some rules when dealing with [Jewish moneylenders.](https://www.bl.uk/magna-carta/articles/magna-carta-english-translation) Historian Paul Johnson writes:

>“The Jews reacted by engaging in the one business where Christian laws actually discriminated in their favour, and so became identified with the hated trade of moneylending. Rabbi Joseph Colon, who knew both France and Italy in the second half of the fifteenth century, wrote that the Jews of both countries hardly engaged in any other profession” (Johnson, Paul. (1988). A History of the Jews. , p. 174)

Johnson mentions other ways in which Jews helped push the world in a more capitalist direction. One was financial innovation via their influence in the development of stock markets. Another was their stress on the importance of advertising. Better advertising speeds up competition and its spread of superior ideas/products so it is a great boost to civilization/order. Johnson also mentions how “Jews were exceptionally adept at gathering and making use of commercial intelligence.” (Johnson, p. 286) For centuries Jews had evolved into a sort of extended family that covered much of the Western world, “they ran sensitive and speedy information systems which enabled them to respond rapidly to political and military events and to the changing demands of regional, national and world markets.” (Johnson, p. 286) The September 27th 1712 issue of England’s Spectator described the Jew’s influence as follows:

>"They are so disseminated through all the trading Parts of the World, that they are become the instruments by which the most distant Nations converse with one another and by which mankind are knit together in a general correspondence. They are like the pegs and nails in a great building, which though they are but little valued in themselves, are absolutely necessary to keep the whole frame together." (Sombart "The Jews and Modern Capitalism", p. 171)

It was bad enough that they rejected the divinity of Christianity and Islam and practiced usury; but Jews were also fierce competitors who would upset Christian businessmen by disrupting their anti-competitive customs, all for the great benefit of the consumer and European social order and culture of course. Historian/Economist Werner Sombart mentions how according to the values at the time “To take away your neighbour’s customers was contemptible, unchristian, and immoral” (Sombart, p. 129). For example, in 1745 Toulouse France, Christian traders complained that “everybody runs to the Jewish traders.” (Sombart, p. 126) In Poland, 1619, “difficulties and stumbling-blocks are put in the way of merchants and craftsmen by the competition of Jews” (Sombart, p. 126). In England, 17th century English merchant and one time governor of the East India Company Josiah Child mentioned, “The Jews are a subtil people… depriving the English merchant of that profit he would otherwise gain.”[108] In Prussia, 1750 “The merchants of our town…complain… that Jewish traders who sell the same goods do them a great harm, because they sell at a lower price.” (Sombart, p. 142) Mises writes:

>"The Nazis have an ally in every town or village where there is a man eager to get rid of a Jewish competitor. The secret weapon of Hitler is the anti-Jewish inclinations of many millions of shopkeepers and grocers, of doctors and lawyers, professors and writers." [(Mises, "Omnipotent Government")](https://oll.libertyfund.org/titles/mises-omnipotent-government-the-rise-of-the-total-state-and-total-war/simple)

Hitler, who like most popular leaders was simply the embodiment of the economic fallacies/myths/prejudices of the times, was of course a 'National Socialist', who had little understanding of the vital role that economic freedom plays in society and erroneously saw things like the emerging stock markets and finance industry, especially given the relative over-representation of Jews, as some gimmick/scam plotted by them to the detriment of non-Jews. His fallacies/ignorance can easily be seen in numerous excerpts like this one from a speech given in Munich on July 28th, 1922:

>"The vast process of the industrialization of the peoples meant the confluence of great masses of workmen in the towns...Parallel with this was a gradual 'moneyfication' of the whole of the nation's labor-strength. 'Share-capital' was in the ascendant, and thus bit by bit the Stock Exchange came to control the whole national economy. The directors of these institutions were, and are without exception, Jews. I say 'without exception,' for the few non-Jews who had a share in them are in the last resort nothing but screens, shop-window Christians, whom one needs in order, for the sake of the masses, to keep up the appearance that these institutions were after all founded as a natural outcome of the needs and the economic life of all peoples alike, and were not, as was the fact, institutions which correspond only with the essential characteristics of the Jewish people and are the outcome of those characteristics." [(Hitler)](http://comicism.tripod.com/220728.html)

We should quickly add that Churchill, being a slightly smarter ape like Hitler and absorbing similar popular ideas of the times was just as racist and for draconian forceful sterilizations:

>"I propose that 100,000 degenerate Britons should be forcibly sterilized and others put in labour camps to halt the decline of the British race."

>"I am strongly in favour of using poisoned gas against uncivilised tribes"

>"[Mahatma Gandhi] ought to be lain bound hand and foot at the gates of Delhi, and then trampled on by an enormous elephant with the new Viceroy seated on its back. Gandhi-ism and everything it stands for will have to be grappled with and crushed."

>"I hate Indians. They are beastly people with a beastly religion."

>"I do not admit… that a great wrong has been done to the Red Indians of America, or the black people of Australia… by the fact that a stronger race, a higher grade race… has come in and taken its place." 

Let us also briefly discuss some of the environmental/'evolutionary factors'/pressures which unfortunately attracted so many Jews to Socialism/Communism with disastrous repercussions. How prevalent were Jews in spreading/implementing Socialist/Communist ideology? First of all there was Karl Marx, Socialism/Communism's main intellectual who gave the movement enough of a naïve intellectual aura to mislead hundreds of future would-be dictators/intellectuals. Leon Trotsky(born Lev Davidovich Bronstein), founder of the Red Army, second only to Lenin and most likely to succeed him as leader of the Russian communists was also an ethnic Jew. Slezkine writes:

>"At the First All-Russian Congress of Soviets in June 1917, at least 31 percent of Bolshevik delegates(and 37 percent of Unified Social Democrats) were Jews. At the Bolshevik Central Committee meeting of October 23, 1917, which voted to launch an armed insurrection, 5 out of the 12 members present were Jews. Three out of seven Politbureau members charged with leading the October uprising were Jews(Trotsky, Zinoviev, and Grigory Sokolnikov)." (Slezkine,"The Jewish Century" p. 175)

According to Lenin, it was thanks to Jews that his Bolsheviks were able to "take over the state apparatus" in Russia. Lenin mentions:

>"The fact that there were many Jewish intelligentsia members in the Russian cities was of great importance to the revolution. They put an end to the general sabotage that we were confronted with after the October Revolution… The Jewish elements were mobilized… and thus saved the revolution at a difficult time. It was only thanks to this pool of a rational and literate labor force that we succeeded in taking over the state apparatus" (Slezkine, "The Jewish Century" p. 224)

Winston Churchill wisely recognized the tremendous role Jews have played in spreading civilization-enabling ideas, as in the foundation of Christian/Western morals(the simplicity/viralness/competitiveness of the Ten Commandments), as well as disastrous ones as in the case of their large involvement in Socialism/Communism. He writes:

>"Some people like Jews and some do not; but no thoughtful man can doubt the fact that they are beyond all question the most formidable and the most remarkable race which has ever appeared in the world….The conflict between good and evil which proceeds unceasingly in the breast of man nowhere reaches such an intensity as in the Jewish race. The dual nature of mankind is nowhere more strongly or more terribly exemplified. We owe to the Jews in the Christian revelation a system of ethics which, even if it were entirely separated from the supernatural, would be incomparably the most precious possession of mankind, worth in fact the fruits of all other wisdom and learning put together. On that system and by that faith there has been built out of the wreck of the Roman Empire the whole of our existing civilization. And it may well be that this same astounding race may at the present time be in the actual process of producing another system of morals and philosophy, as malevolent as Christianity was benevolent, which, if not arrested, would shatter irretrievably all that Christianity has rendered possible. It would almost seem as if the gospel of Christ and the gospel of Antichrist were destined to originate among the same people; and that this mystic and mysterious race had been chosen for the supreme manifestations, both of the divine and the diabolical….

>There is no need to exaggerate the part played in the creation of Bolshevism and in the actual bringing about of the Russian Revolution, by these international and for the most part atheistical Jews, it is certainly a very great one; it probably outweighs all others. With the notable exception of Lenin, the majority of the leading figures are Jews. Moreover, the principal inspiration and driving power comes from the Jewish leaders. Thus Tchitcherin, a pure Russian, is eclipsed by his nominal subordinate Litvinoff, and the influence of Russians like Bukharin or Lunacharski cannot be compared with the power of Trotsky, or of Zinovieff, the Dictator of the Red Citadel (Petrograd) or of Krassin or Radek –all Jews. In the Soviet institutions the predominance of Jews is even more astonishing. And the prominent, if not indeed the principal, part in the system of terrorism applied by the Extraordinary Commissions for Combating Counter-Revolution has been taken by Jews…" [(Churchill's essay "Zionism vs. Bolshevism (1920))](https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Zionism_versus_Bolshevism)

Churchill's last sentence above refers to the most unfortunate over-representation of Jews within the Communist nightmare, their over-representation in the top echelons of the Soviet Union's famed/tyrannical secret police, the Cheka, later becoming the OGPU, then NKVD… Slezkine writes that:

>"In 1923, at the time of the creation of the OGPU(the Cheka's successor), Jews made up 15.5 percent of all "leading" officials and 50 percent of the top brass (4 out of 8 members of the Collegium's Secretariat). "Socially alien" Jews were well represented among Cheka-OGPU prisoners, too, but Leonard Schapiro is probably justified in generalizing (especially about the territory of the former Pale) that "anyone who had the misfortune to fall into the hands of the Cheka stood a very good chance of finding himself confronted with and possibly shot by a Jewish investigator." (Slezkine, Yuri. (2004). The Jewish Century., p. 177) … "Indeed, the Soviet secret police - the regime's sacred center, known after 1934 as the NKVD - was one of the most Jewish of all Soviet institutions. In January 1937, on the eve of the Great Terror, the 111 top NKVD officials included 42 Jews, 35 Russians, 8 Latvians, and 26 others. Out of twenty NKVD directorates, twelve(60 percent, including State Security, Police, Labor Camps, and Resettlement) were headed by officers who identified themselves as ethnic Jews. The most exclusive and sensitive of all NKVD agencies, the Main Directorate for State Security, consisted of ten departments: seven of them(…) were run by immigrants from the former Pale of Settlement. Foreign service was an almost exclusively Jewish specialty (as was spying for the Soviet Union in Western Europe and especially in the United States). The Gulag, or Main Labor Camp Administration, was headed by ethnic Jews from 1930, when it was formed, until late November 1938, when the Great Terror was almost over." (Ibid, pp. 254–5)

For a people who were sometimes seen as foreigners, Socialism's international brotherhood ("Workers of the world, unite!" was to be a popular rallying cry) would seem to have an additional appeal and be a perfect fit for a people who were already a sort of international family. Socialism's atheism would also do away with a major source of Jewish troubles now that everyone was supposed to be atheist/irreligious in the new scientific and rational Socialist world. The central and viral economic fallacy of Socialism, that having smart people/"experts" plan the social order would be better than letting selfish and greedy businessmen do so, needed the smarter and better educated to be the planners, and this is exactly what Jews were compared to the rest (at least in Russia), thus naturally rising to the top of the movement. Historian William Johnston writes that "Jews had enjoyed many centuries of literacy before the rest of Europe started to become literate in the eighteenth [century."](https://books.google.com/books?id=it9c6z4bw_8C&pg=PA38&lpg=PA38&dq=%22Jews+had+enjoyed+many+centuries+of+literacy+before+the+rest+of+Europe+started+to+become+literate+in+the+eighteenth+century%22&source=bl&ots=w6zPc5ISGe&sig=ACfU3U32b6Ni1Nyd9C-paQSGo84xFZeHpQ&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwiN77GIj__mAhU5HjQIHWZkDNIQ6AEwAHoECAYQAQ#v=onepage&q=%22Jews%20had%20enjoyed%20many%20centuries%20of%20literacy%20before%20the%20rest%20of%20Europe%20started%20to%20become%20literate%20in%20the%20eighteenth%20century%22&f=false) Slezkine gives more detail:

>"The Jews were, consistently and by a substantial margin, the most literate group in the Soviet Union(85 percent, as compared to 58 percent for Russians, in 1926; and 94.3 percent, as compared to 83.4 percent for Russians, in 1939)…By 1939, 26.5 percent of all Jews had had a high school education(as compared to 7.8 percent of the population for the Soviet Union as a whole and 8.1 percent of Russians in the Russian Federation). In Leningrad, the proportion of high school graduates among Jews was 40.2 percent(as compared to 28.6 percent for the city as a whole). The number of Jewish students in the two upper grades of Soviet high schools was more than 3.5 times their share in the general population." [(Slezkine, "The Jewish Century" p. 222)](https://books.google.com/books?id=qzN6DwAAQBAJ&pg=PA222&lpg=PA222&dq=%22The+Jews+were,+consistently+and+by+a+substantial+margin,+the+most+literate+group+in+the+Soviet+Union%22&source=bl&ots=AFyu8t5M2s&sig=ACfU3U3yeYE4FlVqlF_gUCu1zrGwGLDiow&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjYu7Gyj__mAhVYHzQIHcDfD-kQ6AEwAHoECAEQAQ#v=onepage&q=%22The%20Jews%20were%2C%20consistently%20and%20by%20a%20substantial%20margin%2C%20the%20most%20literate%20group%20in%20the%20Soviet%20Union%22&f=false)

Chaim Weizmann recalls in his autobiography the simple fact that: "the non-Jewish population had not the same overwhelming thirst for knowledge as the Jews, who were always knocking at the doors of the [schools."](https://books.google.com/books?id=fl2mDwAAQBAJ&pg=PT37&lpg=PT37&dq=%22the+non-Jewish+population+had+not+the+same+overwhelming+thirst+for+knowledge+as+the+Jews,+who+were+always+knocking+at+the+doors+of+the+schools%22&source=bl&ots=a-o-w_-ls7&sig=ACfU3U1DZJvYeKpFP8ephZe8RFXCfH9uZA&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwi6v5LCj__mAhXzGDQIHeb_CHcQ6AEwAHoECAMQAQ#v=onepage&q=%22the%20non-Jewish%20population%20had%20not%20the%20same%20overwhelming%20thirst%20for%20knowledge%20as%20the%20Jews%2C%20who%20were%20always%20knocking%20at%20the%20doors%20of%20the%20schools%22&f=false)

This large participation/association of ethnic Jews with Socialism would have disastrous consequences for the majority of Jews who did not want to be a part of Socialism or much less abandon their faith and traditions. As Lenin and Trotsky were launching post-WWI Russia into a civil war(1918–22) between the Communist Red Army and the White Russian Army which supported the Russian Monarchy and old order/institutions, Jews would pay a heavy price. Johnson writes that:

>"The consequences for the Jews both immediate and long-term, both locally and world-wide, were appalling. The White Russian armies, seeking to destroy the Soviet regime, treated all Jews as enemies. In the Ukraine, the Civil War developed into the most extensive pogrom in Jewish history. There were more than 1,000 separate incidents involving the killing of Jews. Over 700 communities in the Ukraine were involved and several hundred more in Russia. Between 60,000 and 70,000 Jews were murdered. In other parts of eastern Europe, a similar identification of Jews with Bolshevism led directly to murderous attacks on harmless Jewish communities. They were particularly bloody in Poland after the failure of the Bolshevik invasion and in Hungary after the fall of the Bela Kun regime. They occurred intermittently in Rumania throughout the 1920s. In all three countries the local Communist Parties had been largely created and run by Non-Jewish Jews, and in each case it was the unpolitical, traditional, observant Jews of the ghettos and villages who paid the penalty." (Johnson, "A History of the Jews", p. 452)

Again, it needs to be stressed, as Johnson just mentioned: "In all three countries the local Communist Parties had been largely created and run by Non-Jewish Jews". Thus it is quite understandable how so many like Hitler, Churchill and many Europeans came to associate/equate Jews with it. 

We are now in a position to fully appreciate Herzl's wisdom when he summarizes: 

>"We are what the Ghetto made us. We have attained pre-eminence in finance, because mediaeval conditions drove us to it. The same process is now being repeated. We are again being forced into finance, now it is the stock exchange, by being kept out of other branches of economic activity. Being on the stock exchange, we are consequently exposed afresh to contempt. At the same time we continue to produce an abundance of mediocre intellects who find no outlet, and this endangers our social position as much as does our increasing wealth. Educated Jews without means are now rapidly becoming Socialists. Hence we are certain to suffer very severely in the struggle between classes, because we stand in the most exposed position in the camps of both Socialists and [capitalists."](https://www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/quot-the-jewish-state-quot-theodor-herzl) 

We must emphasize that Socialist/Communist ideology, rooted on easy to absorb economic fallacies, was already occurring in the Western world and can be seen as an almost inevitable mistake as mankind tried to make sense of the workings of the social order/economy which was quickly growing in bewildering complexity. Jews were inadvertently in a position to be more attracted to Socialism and Capitalism and be leaders in both. They obviously did not "invent" or "plot" Socialism/Communism/Capitalism like Hitler and many others to this day claim. It could be said that they were 'naturally selected' to be Socialist/Capitalist/finance leaders, thus giving the impression that they were its "creators/plotters". Jewish involvement in such movements was "indeed the result of human action, but not the execution of any human design." If "the Jews" were smart enough to "plot" the numerous things the non-Jewish world accuses them of, they would have been smart enough to realize that Socialism/Communism was a disaster for Jew and non-Jew alike and have been telling everyone about fellow Jew Ludwig von Mises. Both mankind's utter ignorance of the workings of the socioeconomic order and its evolution, as well as antisemitism and the Jew/Gentile conflicts can be seen as outgrowths of the same sort of economic ignorance. **AND MUST BE DEALT WITH ACCORDINGLY!!!!** The cycle of economic ignorance -> antisemitism > antisemite (first European/Hitler, now due to Zionism Iran/Middle East) vs. Jews and sympathetic supporters -> World War (II and coming III) must be broken!
