
### The the war on drugs

Many people like mind-altering substances/drugs/alcohol/etc., mankind always has and they have played an important role in our cultural evolution since getting high was an important way to interact with the spirit world/gods which played a vital role in the emergence of our religions/rules/laws/etc. Since many drugs are outlawed but people still want them and are thus willing to trade money for them, their cost has to pay for the additional risk involved in their production, the concealment, bribes, etc. Their relative high price needed to cover such costs/consumption inevitably motivates people, especially poorer and less educated/productive people, to enter the drug-production and trafficking business. Eventually these people get busted which now forces taxpayers to pay over $30,000 per year to keep each drug dealer and user in jail. Each drug bust and jailing of dealers/producers simply reduces the supply of drugs which means a smaller amount of wealth being chased by the same amount of money so that their price simply goes up, once again increasing the motivation for people to become drug producers/traffickers/dealers. This is a cycle that never ends and has nearly half a million Americans in jail at an enormous cost to taxpayers and causing horrible suffering and misery. Powerful drug cartels/businesses emerge in poorer countries where the cost to not only manufacture the drugs is less but to also avoid/bribe/terrorize the local police/citizens which explains why countries like Mexico have so much drug-related violence. If drugs are decriminalized, suddenly the cost of concealment, bribes, risks, goes away and so does the wealth that sustains the dangerous cartels and related violence. The half million can be free and productive instead of massive consumers of tax-payer wealth while they suffer in jail. Racist/corrupt cops lose an easy way to stop and harass millions. Drugs will be cheap and safe like alcohol/wine. Here is a great quote showing how the motivating factor behind the prohibition of recreational drugs was racism:

Harry J. Anslinger, the nation’s first Drug Czar, before Congress in 1937 said: 

>“There are 100,000 total marijuana smokers in the U.S. and most are Negroes, Hispanics, Filipinos and entertainers. Their satanic music, jazz and swing, result from marijuana use. This marijuana causes white women to seek sexual relations with Negroes.” 
